---
layout: post
title: An Interesting Approach to a Geometric Problem
date: 2024-04-11 11:12:00-0400
description: an example of a blog post with some math
tags: geometric
categories: discrete distributions
related_posts: false
---
The other day Cody was trying to calculate the average number of trials he should run in Melvor Idle, a video game which is obviously known to be the purest form of what a highly addictive adventure game is stripped down to. The question is, if a specific item has a chance of 0.55 (generally, $(1-p)$) to disappear every time you use it, what is the expected number of uses you can get out of the item? Keep in mind, using the item does not wear it out (i.e. the probability of disappearing in a trial stays constant unless it already disappear from the previous use). Supposing that you are familiar with some discrete Statistical distributions, without a shadow of doubt the problem boils down to calculating the expected value of a geometric random variable (i.e. let $A$ --- not to be confused with random variable $X$ I'm going to use below --- be the number of uses I can obtain before the item breaks down, then $A$ follows geometric distribution and $\mathbf{E}(A)=\displaystyle\frac{1}{1-p}=1/0.55$). Unfortunately, with limited experience in Statistics under his belt, Cody had never heard of geometric distribution but instead he came up with a solution to the problem, which I personally find brilliant.

As a matter of fact, the minimum number of uses is 1. Now assume we are only restricted to use the item twice at most, if the item still exists after the first use. With that being said, the maximum of uses is 2, thus it allows us to write the number of uses as a random variable X in the form of $X = 1 + Y$, where Y is the random factor that determine if we are going to end up with 1 use or 2 uses. To be specific, you only get 1 use if the item disappears after the first use and 2 uses out of the item otherwise. In other words, Y plays the role as the outcome of the first usage. Let us denote the two possible values that Y can take by 0 and 1, where 0 implies that the item disappears and 1 implies that the item remains accessible after the first use. Hence,

Y =\begin{cases}0, & P(Y=0) = 1-p\\1, & P(Y=1) = p\end{cases}. 

The expected number of uses under the assumption that you have to stop at the second trial, $\mathbf{E}(X)$, is therefore calculated as

\mathbf{E}(X) = 1+\mathbf{E}(Y)= 1 + p

Generally, assume that the maximum number of trials is n, the expected number of uses is $\displaystyle\sum_{i=0}^{n-1} p^i$. The fact is the maximum number of trials indeed can go to infinity, which means the expected number of uses is $\displaystyle\sum_{i=0}^{\infty} p^i$ --- this is the geometric series with coefficient of 1, which yields to the same answer $\displaystyle\sum_{i=0}^{\infty} p^i = \frac{1}{1-p}=1/0.55$. This approach is evidently how geometric distribution was derived --- as the name suggests.


This theme supports rendering beautiful math in inline and display modes using [MathJax 3](https://www.mathjax.org/) engine. You just need to surround your math expression with `$$`, like `$$ E = mc^2 $$`. If you leave it inside a paragraph, it will produce an inline expression, just like $$ E = mc^2 $$.

To use display mode, again surround your expression with `$$` and place it as a separate paragraph. Here is an example:

$$
\sum_{k=1}^\infty |\langle x, e_k \rangle|^2 \leq \|x\|^2
$$

You can also use `\begin{equation}...\end{equation}` instead of `$$` for display mode math.
MathJax will automatically number equations:

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:cauchy-schwarz}
\left( \sum_{k=1}^n a_k b_k \right)^2 \leq \left( \sum_{k=1}^n a_k^2 \right) \left( \sum_{k=1}^n b_k^2 \right)
\end{equation}

and by adding `\label{...}` inside the equation environment, we can now refer to the equation using `\eqref`.

Note that MathJax 3 is [a major re-write of MathJax](https://docs.mathjax.org/en/latest/upgrading/whats-new-3.0.html) that brought a significant improvement to the loading and rendering speed, which is now [on par with KaTeX](http://www.intmath.com/cg5/katex-mathjax-comparison.php).
